# Simulating the Effects of Alcohol on a Purkinje Neuron Using the Izhikevich Model

Project for SYDE 522 Computational Neuroscience (Winter 2024), University of Waterloo. 

_Abstract:_ The cognitive and physical effects of alcohol have been widely explored in neuroscience, addiction, decision-making, driving simulations, and other applications, but one question of interest is how alcohol consumption affects the body on a neuron level. As such, the goal of this project is to use an Izhikevich (IZH) neuron model of the Purkinje cell to simulate the effects of alcohol on neuron spiking. Various levels of alcohol should produce different spike patterns to explain how the substance interferes with neuron communication, thus causing impaired behaviours. The methodology used involved replicating normal Purkinje neuron firing using an IZH model and then adding alcohol inhibition by introducing constants/functions that change the neuron dynamics. Spiking pattern, inter-spike interval, spike amplitude, firing rate, and model runtime were measured and compared between models. The results of the final Izhikevich model showed an adequate replication of the normal neuron behaviour under no alcohol inhibition compared to the baseline Hodgkin-Huxley full compartment model. Adding scaling terms to the dynamic equations mimicked the inhibitory effects of alcohol and produced various model behaviours. Overall, greater alcohol concentration levels reduced the number of spikes, firing rate, and neuron activity in general. These results align with inhibition seen in literature, and can theoretically be used to better understand alcohol action on behaviours at the neuron level. The IZH model was still unable to capture some behaviour such as the depolarization block expected in the alcohol simulation. Future work could involve a better implementation of the baseline model and representing alcohol inhibition as differential equations to provide more realistic membrane channel dynamics.
